New java manual (#413)
neo4j/driver-documentation: java-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/connect.adoc

= Connection

Once you have xref:install.adoc#install-driver[installed the driver] and have xref:install.adoc#get-an-instance[a running Neo4j instance], you are ready to connect your application to the database.

== Connect to the database

You connect to a database by creating a <<Driver>> object and providing a URL and an authentication token.

[source, java, role=nocollapse]
----
package main;

import org.neo4j.driver.AuthTokens;
import org.neo4j.driver.GraphDatabase;

public class App {

    // URI examples: "neo4j://localhost", "neo4j+s://xxx.databases.neo4j.io"

>     private static final String URI = "<URI for Neo4j database>";

Reviewer: Unsure if I would use constants in the connect example, while they are helpful to indicate what the parameter does by their name, they otherwise clutter things.

Author: You mean local variables inside `main` would be more appropriate? How so? I'm interested in understanding why you wouldn't use class constants in your own app.

Reviewer: The values that you store in those constants are not values that are usually constant, quite the contrary. You get them as user input, from Dotenv (which you do at the next step) or other config mechanism. They are conceptional no constants.

Having them as variables is helpful, as Java has no named parameters and so you see their meaning immediately.

Reviewer: That said, I do use class constants a lot, if appropriate, see for example: https://github.com/michael-simons/neo4j-migrations/blob/main/neo4j-migrations-core/src/main/java/ac/simons/neo4j/migrations/core/Defaults.java

But take note: This class cannot be inherited, cannot be instantiated. I care about these semantics a lot.

    private static final String USER = "<Username>";
    private static final String PASSWORD = "<Password>";

    public static void main(String... args) {
        try (var driver = GraphDatabase.driver(URI, AuthTokens.basic(USER, PASSWORD))) {  // <1>
            driver.verifyConnectivity();  // <2>
        }
    }
}
----

<1> Creating a `Driver` instance only provides information on _how_ to access the database, but does not actually _establish_ a connection.
Connection is instead deferred to when the first query is executed.
<2> To verify immediately that the driver can connect to the database (valid credentials, compatible versions, etc), use the `.verifyConnectivity()` method after initializing the driver.

Both the creation of a `Driver` object and the connection verification can raise a number of different link:https://neo4j.com/docs/api/java-driver/current/org.neo4j.driver/org/neo4j/driver/exceptions/package-summary.html[exceptions].

> Since a connection error is a blocker for any subsequent task, the most common choice is to let the program crash should an exception occur during connection.

Reviewer: That's bold but true!

Please rephrase:
> should an exception occur during connection.

into 

> should an exception occur while establishing a connection.

`Driver` objects are _immutable_, _thread-safe_, and fairly _expensive to create_.
Share them across threads (but not across processes) and use xref:query-simple#impersonation[impersonation] to query the database with a different user.
If you want to alter a `Driver` configuration, you will need to create a new object.

> == Connect to an Aura instance

Reviewer: Please add some sentence that an Aura instance is conceptional not different than any other one, but deliver its credentials in said file.

When you create an <<Aura>> instance, you may download a text file containing the connection information to the database.

> The file has a name of the form `Neo4j-a0a2fa1d-Created-2023-11-06.txt`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The file has a name of the form `Neo4j-a0a2fa1d-Created-2023-11-06.txt`.
It is a so-called Dotenv file, containing various environment variables for a process to work.
```

> To connect to such an instance, you may either use the URI and authentication credentials explicitly in your application, or load the content of the connection file in the environment with `Dotenv.load()` and populate your local variables via `dotenv.get()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can either extract the URI and the credentials from that text file manually or use a third party-module to load it. 
We recommend link:https://github.com/cdimascio/dotenv-java/[`dotenv-java`] for that purpose.
It provides a fluent API to use any Dotenv file in your Java program and access its content.
An example is shown below.
```

This approach requires the module link:https://github.com/cdimascio/dotenv-java/[`dotenv-java`].

[source, java]
----
package main;

import io.github.cdimascio.dotenv.Dotenv;

import org.neo4j.driver.AuthTokens;
import org.neo4j.driver.GraphDatabase;

public class App {

    public static void main(String... args) {

        Dotenv dotenv = Dotenv.configure()
            .directory("/path/to/env/file")
            .filename("Neo4j-a0a2fa1d-Created-2023-11-06.txt")
            .load();

        final String URI = dotenv.get("NEO4J_URI");
        final String USER = dotenv.get("NEO4J_USERNAME");
        final String PASSWORD = dotenv.get("NEO4J_PASSWORD");

        try (var driver = GraphDatabase.driver(URI, AuthTokens.basic(USER, PASSWORD))) {
            driver.verifyConnectivity();

>         }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        var dotenv = Dotenv.configure()
            .directory("/path/to/env/file")
            .filename("Neo4j-a0a2fa1d-Created-2023-11-06.txt")
            .load();

        var uri = dotenv.get("NEO4J_URI");
        var user = dotenv.get("NEO4J_USERNAME");
        var password = dotenv.get("NEO4J_PASSWORD");

        try (var driver = GraphDatabase.driver(uri, AuthTokens.basic(user, password))) {
            driver.verifyConnectivity();
        }
```

UPPERCASE only for class constants, never for variables, even if they are final.

    }
}
----

== Close connections

Always close `Driver` objects to free up all allocated resources, even upon unsuccessful connection or runtime errors.

> Either instantiate the `Driver` object as a resource using the `try` construct, or call the `Driver.close()` method explicitly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Either use the `Driver` object as a resource inside a try-with-resources statement as shown in our examples, or call the `Driver.close()` method explicitly.
```
